Welcome to the fifth session of our Pursue Peace Convention, which corresponds to the Sunday morning session on your program.
Our music video presentation is about to begin.
As you watch, please notice how pursuing peace with God brings great happiness.
Please enjoy the presentation.
Greetings brothers and sisters.
What's your theme for this session and the next is taken from the inspired words found in Romans 15, verse 13, which says in part,
May the God who gives hope, fill you with all joy and peace.
We invite all to sing song number 101, working together in unity.
Again, that's song number 101.
Sometimes specific challenges can make it difficult for servants of Jehovah to pursue peace.
What are these challenges and how can we overcome them?
These questions will be answered in a seven-part symposium.
We will consider how we can imitate the examples of those who reaped peace after first sowing it.
To begin, let's give our attention to brother William Turner, a helper to this service committee as he presents the talk.
How they sowed and reaped peace. Joseph and his brothers.
The Bible contains many fundamental principles that a Christian can use every day to guide his life.
For example, at Proverbs chapter 13 verse 20, we're told that if we walk with wise persons, we will become wise.
Proverbs 28 states that if we're faithful, we will receive many blessings.
Likely, you have Bible principles that you live by as well.
However, as it pertains to pursuing peace, there is one essential principle that must be followed.
Let's find out what it is.
Turn with me please to Galatians chapter 6.
And let's read the words of Galatians chapter 6 verses 7 and 8.
Here we read,
Do not be misled.
God is not one to be mocked.
For whatever a person is sowing, this he will also reap.
Because the one sowing with a view to his flesh will reap corruption from his flesh.
But the one sowing with a view to the spirit will reap everlasting life from the spirit.
So the principle?
We reap what we sow.
You might think of a farmer.
He knows that he must plant what he hopes to reap.
He also knows that he will not reap fruitage right away.
But he trusts that results will come in due time.
It is similar with the quality of peace.
The only way for us to reap peace is to sow it.
And as we put in the work to achieve it, we trust that in due time, we will reap the benefits.
In this symposium, we will consider viable and modern day accounts of how Jehovah s people,
despite particular challenges, have reaped peace after first sowing it.
Now one particular challenge to gaining peace is problems within the family.
Because of imperfection, it s not uncommon to have disagreements, even tension from time to time.
And family members may hurt one another in various ways.
And usually such offenses are minor.
And peace can quickly be sown and reaped.
But what if the offense is more serious?
A family member says or does something that hurts us deeply.
Well, even then, it still may be possible to sow and reap peace.
We can prove this by considering the Bible account of Joseph and his brothers.
And we are familiar with the story.
Out of envy, Joseph s brothers sold him into slavery.
And this was by no means a minor offense.
It began with Joseph being led to Egypt.
Sometime later, he was falsely accused and thrown into prison.
So for 13 years, Joseph suffered his treatment when he had done nothing to deserve it.
Now it could have been very easy for Joseph to feel that if he ever saw his brothers again,
the best option for peace would be not to have any dealings with them at all.
Perhaps we might feel the same way as well.
But Joseph didn t do that.
In fact, after some years passed, both Joseph and his brothers sold peace.
Now note how this was done.
Turn with me please to the 105th Psalm and note the 19th verse of Psalm 105.
It says, until the time that his word proved true,
the saying of Jehovah is what refined him.
Joseph trusted in Jehovah to refine him, to shape his thinking and godly qualities.
He refused to become bitter.
In fact, how interesting it is to note that there is nothing in the scriptures to indicate
that Joseph ever told anyone, not even Pharaoh,
that his brothers were the ones who kidnapped him and sold him as a slave.
And how about Joseph s brothers?
Years after they had mistreated him, they met Joseph in Egypt.
When Joseph tested them by giving the youngest brother Benjamin significantly more attention
than he gave the others, he saw his brothers had changed.
They had let go of envy.
They showed genuine concern for their brother and for their father Jacob.
Joseph realized that his brothers were repentant and he forgave them.
And because Joseph and his brothers were willing to take steps to sow peace,
they reaped the benefits and eventually were able to enjoy a harmonious relationship.
Well, how can the example of Joseph and his brothers help us today?
In the following dramatization, notice how a family member sows peace.
Every morning, and I mean every morning, there's Jeremy singing at the top of his lungs.
Okay, I wasn't the only one.
No, but you were the loudest.
Spoken like a true big brother.
I was always impressed with how close you two were.
Well, it wasn't always that way.
No.
I mean, it started out that way.
Nick and I, we weren't just brothers.
We were friends.
But then the family business ran into trouble.
And what started as a small disagreement just exploded.
How are business works?
Instead of criticizing, could you just once?
Jeremy!
Do you have any idea what this is going to cost us?
I didn't have a choice. You went behind my back.
What's your problem?
You, you're the problem.
We tried to work it out.
But things just got worse.
It was like a door slam shut between us.
On the outside, I acted like everything was fine.
But inside, I couldn't let it go.
I felt like a total hypocrite and that had to change.
I needed a lot of help from Jehovah to let go,
to move on and make things right with Nick.
It took a long time for the wounds to heal.
And for us to trust each other, the way we used to.
But we did.
I'm so grateful that we made peace before the world turned upside down.
So how can you and I imitate Joseph and his brothers?
Let's discuss three steps.
The first step is found in Ephesians chapter 4, verse 32.
Let's read that.
Ephesians 4, verse 32.
But become kind to one another, tenderly compassionate,
freely forgiving one another, just as God also by Christ,
freely forgave you.
So first, we must be ready to forgive.
If we like grievances and resentment build up and develop in our hearts,
it becomes even more difficult to be forgiving.
Did you note in the video what started as a small disagreement
between Nick and Jeremy exploded into something much bigger?
Why?
Jeremy could not let go of his resentment towards his brother.
We must work to treat others in a forgiving way,
just as Jehovah treats us.
The second step, don't dwell on the offense.
Proverbs 17 and 9 says,
the one who keeps harping on a matter separates close friends.
And isn't that how Jeremy described the relationship with his brother?
It was a door slam shut between them.
It wasn't until steps were taken to so peace,
having that open, honest communication with each other,
spending time together, working with each other in the ministry.
Only then did things start to improve.
And did you notice?
Everything did not go back to normal right away.
It took time to read peace.
Time for those wounds to heal.
Time to regain lost trust,
so we can't look for miracles.
But we should look for progress.
Like the farmer, trust that.
In new time, we will see results from our efforts.
And here's where the all-important third step comes in.
Ask Jehovah in prayer to help us to let go of resentment.
Remember Psalm 105, 19?
It was the sayings of Jehovah that helped refine Joseph
to develop the qualities needed not to become bitter
and to let go of any resentment.
In the video, Jeremy acknowledged that he needed Jehovah's help,
to let go and to move on.
And Jehovah can do the same for us.
It's not easy when we go through situations
that threaten the peace of our family.
But if we live by this fundamental principle,
we reap what we sow.
Then we can be assured that with the forgiving spirit,
looking for opportunities to sow peace,
and be seeking Jehovah for his help,
that our efforts will be blessed.
And in due time,
we and our family can reap the benefits
and enjoy true peace.
For the Ronald Curzon, a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will now present the next talk of this symposium,
how they sowed and reaped peace to give you a nice.
There is a battle that has lasted for centuries
and continues down to our day.
It's a battle of wills,
the will of disobedient humans who fight against Jehovah's will.
Rather than submitting or surrendering their will
to do Jehovah's will,
most humans refuse to make peace with him,
becoming peace-breakers.
On the other hand,
millions throughout the centuries
have humbly submitted to Jehovah's will,
making his will their will,
they are known as peace-makers.
By sowing peace with Jehovah,
they have reaped the benefits
of having a close personal friendship with him,
and the wonderful hope of living forever
in a peaceful new world.
Even so, we must admit,
it can be difficult at times to accept
and then follow Jehovah's direction,
or direction that we may receive from his organization,
especially if we don't understand the reasons
behind the direction,
or it's not what we might prefer.
What is needed to sow and reap peace?
Humility.
Humility is defined as a lowliness of mind,
freedom from pride or arrogance.
A humble person is not self-willed,
but they actively look for ways to sow peace
with Jehovah and others.
He's known as a peacemaker.
What is the result of humility and sowing peace?
Notice what Proverbs 22 in verse 4 says.
The result of humility and the fear of Jehovah is
reaping notice riches and glory and life.
Yes, everlasting life.
The Bible contains many fine examples
of those who sowed and reaped peace
by humbly submitting to Jehovah's will.
Let's consider the example of the Ghibbia Knights.
The Ghibbia Knights weren't they enemies
of the Israelites?
Yes.
So how did they humbly sow and reap peace with Jehovah
and with his people?
As you recall, after Joshua led the Israelites
across the Jordan River into the Promised Land,
Jehovah directed them to remove
the pagan Canaanite nations who dwelt there.
This included the Ghibbia Knights.
The account that Joshua 9 informs us
that the Ghibbia Knights were plainly told
that it was Jehovah's will that the Canaanites
be annihilated.
Israel's stunning victories over Jericho and AI
made it very clear that Jehovah was fighting for his people.
And the Ghibbia Knights did not want to be next.
But what could they do if this was Jehovah's will?
Well, they devised an interesting plan.
They sent representatives to seek peace
with the Israelites and thereby with Jehovah.
According to verse 11,
they were instructed,
we will be your servants.
Now make a covenant with us.
So this is what they were to say as representatives.
Verse 4 says that the Ghibbia Knights acted shrewdly
by trying to trick the Israelites
with their worn out clothing and provisions,
pretending that they had traveled
from a very distant land,
but were actually just 20 miles away.
Did their plan work?
Despite their deception, yes,
their plan was successful.
In fact, in verse 15,
Joshua made a covenant of peace with the Ghibbia Knights.
Evidently, this was in harmony with Jehovah's will
and reflected their humility and desire
to seek peace with him and his people.
They demonstrated their humility and submission
to Jehovah's will and his representative, Joshua,
by following whatever direction they received.
In fact, notice the direction in verse 27.
It says, Joshua made them gatherers of wood
and drawers of water for the assembly
and for Jehovah's altar.
Although the Ghibbia Knight men were likely skilled warriors,
they were happy and content
to do whatever work they were given
to support pure worship.
Humbly following direction saved their lives
and brought them peace.
How can we imitate the Ghibbia Knights?
By bringing our lives into harmony with Jehovah's will.
For some, this may require making big changes,
adjusting their thinking,
giving up harmful practices
and avoiding bad associates.
We can also imitate the Ghibbia Knights by being willing
to perform whatever assignments we are given,
humbly to support pure worship.
So the lesson is clear.
Sewing and reaping peace requires humbly following direction.
This lesson is highlighted in the following dramatization.
Notice the benefits of submitting to Jehovah's direction.
You see,
pandemic lasted longer than any of us expected.
In all the conflicting news reports,
just added to the stress.
Then my sister lost her job
and had to move in with us.
So yeah,
it was me and Kelly,
Nicole and Dad.
Twenty seconds, son.
Twenty seconds.
Where's your mask?
Don't worry.
Here.
You can use this one.
I won't get near anyone.
Gary.
Listen.
Nobody at the warehouse is wearing masks.
And do you know how many people have actually gotten sick?
Zero.
So far,
you saw the last governing body update.
We can't let down our guard.
Not now.
Dad,
I get it.
Okay?
Look,
I think it's great that the brothers are trying to keep us safe.
But...
But what?
Don't you think that they're, you know, overreacting?
But of course,
it wasn't the brothers who had the problem.
It was me.
A week later,
I found out that a friend in our service group
was in the hospital with COVID-19.
He was young.
And he'd been taking all the rape precautions.
I had really let my guard down.
Oh, it's not the time to slacken our hand
when it comes to safety.
Don't let your guard down.
Don't think the virus can't affect you or your family.
I saw how the organization
was really trying to protect us.
And how much my decisions were affecting others,
including the people I love the most.
As the pandemic dragged on,
I learned the importance of being humble and obedient.
Following Jehovah's direction
didn't just help us stay safe.
It brought us peace.
What timely lessons, especially with all that we are facing today?
Like Gary,
there are times that we may need to adjust our thinking
on matters and put aside our personal opinions and preferences
so we can loyally and humbly follow Jehovah's direction.
Or whatever direction we receive
from his representatives,
the faithful and discreet slave.
Gary learned an important lesson.
Humbly following direction
doesn't just help our family stay safe.
It brings us happiness and peace.
A vital lesson for us today.
What can help us to humbly follow direction now,
as well as in the future?
Note what the Apostle Paul said at Ephesians chapter 5 and verse 17.
He says,
stop being unreasonable,
but keep perceiving what the will of Jehovah is.
The Bible clearly shows
God's thinking on matters.
But what if it's not so clear to us?
Or we struggle to fully grasp how it applies to us personally
or in a given situation?
What did Paul advise?
He said keep perceiving what the will of Jehovah is.
How can we do that?
But just as a minor keeps digging deep below the surface of the ground
to find precious gems,
we must look beyond the surface of what we read in the Bible.
This requires that we keep digging deep,
carefully searching for gems in the form of Bible principles.
Then, we must prayerfully meditate on what we find.
Then, Jehovah's precious thoughts will become our thoughts.
Perceiving Jehovah's thinking on matters will help us to avoid getting into a battle of wills,
so we can follow His direction or whatever direction we receive from the governing body.
Like the Ghibbi inites,
may we be peacemakers by continuing to sow peace with Jehovah and His people.
As we humbly make Jehovah's will our will,
we will joyfully reap abundant peace forever.
Brother Kenneth Flodin, a helper to the teaching committee,
will now consider the next talk of the symposium.
How they sowed and reap peace?
Gideon.
The man Gideon is the Bible example we will consider.
But what is the challenge this talk intends to address?
Are you ready for this?
Difference is between fellow Christians.
You might think, no, how can that be?
Jesus said, the identify mark of His disciples will be the love among themselves, not the differences.
And that is true.
In our Christian Brotherhood, we feel the love.
Love is prominent, it is dominant.
But as individuals, we are drenched in imperfection.
Differences will inevitably erupt.
James 3-2 doesn't mention any words.
It says, we all all stumble many times.
Not constantly, not every day.
But it acknowledges that we make mistakes many times.
A brother or sister may say something to hurt us.
Or maybe we push their emotional button with words, or they push ours.
Usually it's not intentional.
Often it's a misunderstanding.
We or they say something in good faith.
One thinks it's appropriate, the other does not.
Or possibly what we said or did was perceived in a way that we could not even have imagined.
But it happened.
And now we must sow peace in order to reap peace.
And when we plant seeds, some germinate much faster than others.
In the opening talk of this symposium, it acknowledges that a farmer trusts
he will see results in due time.
If we find ourselves at odds with a fellow Christian,
the Bible example of Gideon can help us to sow and reap peace.
Now Gideon was at war with the Midianites.
And he asked his fellow worshippers, the Ephraimites, to help chase them down.
Judges chapter eight.
They had tremendous success.
We say great.
But after the battle, the Ephraimites were offended.
They tried to pick a fight with Gideon.
They felt that Gideon did not call them into battles soon enough.
Judges eight one.
Then a minute of Ephraim said to him,
what have you done to us?
Why did you not call us when you went to fight against Midian?
And they quarreled bitterly with him.
Well, these are all armed fighting men.
If this difference of opinion was allowed to escalate,
it could go out of hand very quickly.
In fact, in this case, hand-to-hand combat might have ensued.
Instead, though, how did Gideon sow peace with words?
Let's read verses two and three.
Hey, Gideon said to them,
what have I done compared with you?
Are not the gleanings of Ephraim better than the great harvest of Abbeezer?
It was into your hand that God gave Midian's princes Orab and Zeab.
And what have I done compared with you?
And notice, when he spoke this way, they calmed down.
Now, in this case, the germination period was very short.
Gideon sowed peace with well-choes and words,
and he reaped peace in one conversation.
Now, in the following dramatization,
notice how a brother prevents a situation
from escalating into a confrontation.
And you know how jealous people are.
When there's a need, our brother step up.
So even though we had a lot of work to do back then,
we always had willing workers.
So many workers that some started to feel like they were being overlooked.
Hey, Ray, what's up?
Hey, Matt, I hear you're organizing the food distribution for our congregation.
Yeah, try my best.
Yeah, well, can I give you a hand?
The truck's all ready to go.
We actually finished just loading up for the day, so I think we're good.
But wow, yeah, thank you very much for offering.
Okay, when's the next run?
You know what, Ray, we're about to pull out right now.
Is it okay if I call you back?
Yeah, sure.
Ray was such a hard worker.
More than most of us even realized.
He put his heart into every assignment.
But when I told him we already had all the help we needed,
it didn't go the way I helped.
Ray, I think you're muted.
So what you're saying is you don't think I'm qualified to help out?
No, no, we just...
We know how hard you're working caring for your mom.
Is Paul Thompson on your crew?
Yeah, but...
And Oliver Kagan.
Oliver's my assistant, yes.
You're just this work, man.
I mean, you just use your friends and you shut the rest of us out.
Don't you think I noticed how your brothers ignore me?
Ray, why were you an apology?
I'm so sorry.
I should have spoke with you about this right from the start.
You're working so hard taking care of your mom.
The last thing we wanted to do was make things harder for you.
But even more than that.
We didn't want to have to ask you to do something.
That would put you or your mother at higher risk.
I know.
I worry about that, too.
Your mom?
We wouldn't want anything to happen to her.
She's one of our congregation treasures.
I know.
And you're not so bad, either.
Seriously, you're such a good example.
And think how Jehovah must feel when he sees all that you're doing.
For us and for your mom.
Thank you.
That means a lot to me.
If something comes up that I can help with then,
even just a little, and I can do it from home.
Two good brothers.
But due to imperfection,
they were both looking at the exact same situation from two different perspectives.
Matt was well-intended in what he did for Ray.
He realized he was caring for his early mother.
He was trying to protect him.
But Ray is offended.
He even accused Matt of showing favoritism to his friends and ignoring others.
Well, how did this calm down?
Well, first of all, thankfully,
Ray went directly to Matt and expressed his feelings between the two of them alone.
Well, what did that allow for a follow?
Well, Matt now had the opportunity to absorb and understand Ray's concerns.
What a blessing that was.
And so, what followed after that?
Well, you remember when he grasped it,
Matt paused and apologized.
His words, like Gideon's, well-spoken, calmed Ray down.
It was a short germination period.
He sowed and reaped peace in one conversation.
Well, how can we imitate Gideon
when there's future differences with fellow worshippers?
2 Timothy 224.
And recall when the men of Ephraim confronted Gideon,
they were confrontational.
They were upset. They were rattling their sabers.
But here, Paul,
in effect summarizes for Christians, Gideon's demeanor.
2 Timothy 224.
For a slave of the Lord does not need to fight.
You see, with words or swords.
Instead, like Gideon, it says, but needs to be gentle toward all, qualified to teach.
And notice this, showing restraint when wrong.
That is not easy to do,
but showing restraint when wrong is a means of sowing peace.
Now, if it's just a minor offense, we might ask ourselves,
can I put up with this slight to avoid a confrontation?
But of course, in the case with Ray, he felt hurt deeply.
Matt realized the perspective was different,
but you remember in hindsight, Matt admitted,
I should have talked to you first.
With those words, he planted seeds of peace.
Now, amazingly long before the first century, Gideon manifested
later what became a Christian principle at Philippians 2.3.
It says, with humility, consider others superior to you.
Do you remember Gideon's exact expression?
Twice, he said,
what have I done compared to you?
His humility calmed the Ephraimites down instantly.
So what can we do?
Well, we can apologize for our contribution to the difference,
even if the apology is done on the other person's terms.
We can pray for him.
We can give a sincere compliment.
Do something kind for the person.
And if we have a discussion, may our words be gracious and toned kindly.
Now, it would be nice if all the differences between Christians
could have a short germination cycle.
But due to circumstances, personalities,
or the nature of the issue, that's not always possible.
But may we each be determined to do our part to so peace,
and like the farmer, expect peace in due time.
And oh, how sweet restored peace truly is.
And now, Brother Robert Lucioni,
a helper for the Publishing Committee,
will give the next talk of this symposium entitled,
how they sowed and reap peace, Abigail.
Pursuing peace can be a challenge.
Because of our imperfections and the complexities of life,
we have to work for peace, even under normal conditions.
But pursuing peace becomes a greater challenge when it's one sided.
At difficult, these arise in the family and in the congregation
when one person pursues peace, but the other does not.
For example, in the congregation, perhaps we have a friend
who has a problem with another friend in the congregation,
but does not do anything to reconcile the situation.
Or in the family, a Christian mate may have difficulty pursuing peace
if his or her spouse does not apply Bible principles.
Well, what do we do then?
Well, in those situations, the Bible account of Abigail may be helpful.
And invite you to turn in your Bibles through 1 Samuel, chapter 25.
And here we're introduced to Abigail and her husband, Nebel.
And you notice here in verse 3,
Nebel is described as harsh.
In verse 25, Abigail describes him as senseless.
In verse 17, his own worker describes him as worthless
and says nobody can speak with him.
Well, with a personality like that,
it's not surprising that his name is streets, David's young man.
And now David wants revenge.
How do you pursue peace in a situation like that?
What does Abigail do?
Well, you think about it.
What she could have done.
See, Abigail could have done nothing.
It's not hard to imagine that she had a difficult life as well,
living with this man.
She could have just stepped back, let David come through
and do what he had in mind.
Or she could have gone out to David and inflamed the situation,
maybe describing what a terrible man he is
and how he must treat her as well.
See, either of these approaches could have made her life easier,
but she didn't do that.
Now, Abigail could not change her husband's ways,
but she did what she could to diffuse an escalating conflict.
In fact, notice her respectful, well chosen words.
Let's go back to 1 Samuel 25.
And let's read verses 27 through 31.
Now, let this gift that your servant girl has brought to my Lord
be given to the young man who are following my Lord.
Pardon, please, the transgression of your servant girl.
For Jehovah will without fail make for my Lord a lasting house.
Because my Lord is fighting the wars of Jehovah.
And no evil has been found in you all your days.
When someone rises up to pursue you and seeks your life,
the life of my Lord will be wrapped securely
in the bag of life with Jehovah your God.
But the lives of your enemies,
he will hurl away like stones from a sling.
And when Jehovah has done for my Lord all the good things he has promised,
and he points you as leader over Israel,
you will have no remorse or regret in your heart
for shedding blood without cause.
And for letting the hand of my Lord take revenge.
When Jehovah confers good upon my Lord,
remember your servant girl.
And do you notice what Abigail does?
She comes in with the gift.
She bows down to David.
She takes the blame for the situation herself.
And she reasons with him using godly principles.
Abigail's actions calm David and a verdict calamity.
She pursued peace.
But to do that, she had a look beyond her own feelings
and consider what was best for Jehovah's name.
And that is not always easy to do.
But what was the result?
Because she sowed peace, she pursued peace, she reaped peace.
How can we benefit from Abigail's example?
Why is it important to do so now?
Let's look at the following dramatization.
And later on, when things got even more intense,
that's when our peace was really put to the test.
Yeah, but Tim, you always found a way to keep us positive.
Well, I learned a lot about that from my better half.
Amy's always had a way of bringing people together.
For example, just before the pandemic,
there were these two pioneer sisters in our congregation.
Becky was energetic, industrious, and fearless in her ministry.
And Lena experienced self-sacrificing
and such a good Bible teacher.
But they didn't exactly get along.
You ready to go?
Are you okay?
It's just it's Becky.
She's just such a phantom pioneer.
We never see her.
I'm sorry, but she just needs to be serious about her ministry.
She's been doing natural witnessing.
I know, I know, an LDC, too, right?
She does plumbing, concrete.
She does have a lot of energy.
Remember when we used to be like that?
I don't know that I was ever like Becky.
No, you weren't.
You were Becky or the Becky.
I couldn't keep up with you.
Those long-service days in your little red car.
That feels like a long time ago.
You know, Becky reminds me a lot of you.
I mean, both of us, 20 years ago.
She's working so hard,
and she's made so many sacrifices for the truth,
just like you have.
I think we should get together.
The three of us.
You should get to know her better.
The next week, I had them both over to the house.
And the more those two got to know each other,
the closer they became.
You know that proverb,
the tongue of the wise is a healing?
Amy taught me what that verse really means.
Okay, everyone out.
When everything changed,
and we suddenly found ourselves locked up together,
I tried to show that same spirit
so that we could stay united.
And with Jehovah's help, we did.
Now, did you notice what our sister did and did not do?
She could have done nothing.
She could have let Lena, her service partner,
cultivate those thoughts about Becky.
Or, Amy could have poured fuel on the situation,
maybe agreeing with Lena,
or telling a few stories how Becky annoyed her as well.
But she did not do that.
See, Amy's desire to sow peace moved her to help Lena,
see things from a different perspective.
And as a result, the congregation benefited and reaped peace.
Notice how the Apostle Paul explains this approach that we should take.
Turning your Bibles to Romans, chapter 12 and verse 18.
Romans, chapter 12 and verse 18.
If possible, as far as it depends on you,
be peaceable with all men.
As far as it depends on you.
See, our congregations, our families benefit
when we sow seeds of peace before matters get out of hand.
It's like seeing a small fire in our house.
What do we do?
Do we just ignore it?
And hope it goes away?
Do we fan the flames?
Do we put fuel on it?
No, we do something. Why?
Because we know that if left unchecked,
that fire could destroy our home.
Well, as similar when we see problems
that develop in peace being disrupted,
we do the same. Why?
Because we know that if we don't do something,
and if it's left unchecked,
that disturbance could destroy our family and the congregation.
So the question is, how do we sow seeds of peace?
Well, Abigail was a good example. Did you notice what she did?
She considered how best to approach the situation.
She was proactive.
She didn't just hope it would go away on its own.
She used respectful, soothing speech.
She was careful not to fan the flames or add fuel to it.
Oh, good steps we can take.
And we have other resources to help us as well.
We can do research in the Bible and in our publications
to see how others have sowed peace in similar situations.
And we can also consult with the elders.
Now, we understand that this is especially a challenge
if the situation isn't a family,
as it was for Abigail.
That is not easy at all.
And in those situations, try to focus on your mate's good qualities,
not on his or her irritating traits.
But with all of this, we have to be realistic.
Remember what the Apostle Paul said there is recorded in verse 18?
He says, if possible, as far as it depends on you.
So Paul was acknowledging that peace with others
may not always be possible.
So what do we do?
We have to do the best that we can.
And then we leave the rest in Jehovah's hands.
So may we be determined to develop the practice of pursuing peace now.
Whether we're in the congregation or in the family,
we can be confident that if we sow peace, we will reap peace
even if others don't respond.
How?
But we'll have peace with Jehovah, peace with ourselves,
and the knowledge that we did the right thing.
Additionally, when in the future,
a force for peace is vitally needed,
we will be prepared to provide it.
For the William Mallenfond, a helper to the teaching committee,
we'll now consider the next talk of this symposium,
how they sowed and reap peace.
Mephibashath.
Inherited imperfection,
we don't like it, but we all have it.
And since imperfection means that everyone is less than perfect,
we are bound to be treated unfairly at times,
even by fellow Christians.
In rare cases, one might become the victim of slander,
or even fraud.
Consider with me an account about slander
that occurred in the nation of Israel in the days of King David.
It's about a man named Mephibashath,
who was slandered by a man named Zyba.
Examining the way that Mephibashath handled this matter
can be of real help to us to sow peace
and to reap peace.
Jonathan was Mephibashath's father,
and King Saul was his grandfather.
When Jonathan and Saul died,
King David gave to Mephibashath all the land of his grandfather.
David assigned Zyba as a servant
to take care of the land that he had given to Mephibashath.
Sometime later, a rebellion in David's household
forced him to flee from Jerusalem,
and Zyba went out to meet David.
When David asked Zyba about Mephibashath
and why he didn't come with Zyba to show his support for David,
Zyba slandered Mephibashath,
saying that he was seeking the kingship for himself.
Sad to say,
David believed the slander
and gave Mephibashath's land to Zyba.
Sometime later, Mephibashath met with King David
and explained why he didn't show up to travel with him.
He told David that Zyba had lied about him.
Upon hearing Mephibashath's side of the story,
David now decided that he and Zyba should share the land.
Instead of complaining or seeking vengeance,
Mephibashath displayed the spiritual qualities of a peacemaker
and he was willing to be wronged.
He said to David as recorded at 2 Samuel, chapter 19,
and verse 30,
these words,
at this Mephibashath said to the king,
let him take it all,
now that my Lord the king has come to his house in peace.
Yes, Mephibashath was more concerned about David's kingship
than he was about himself.
In the following dramatization,
notice how a brother reacts to a perceived injustice
and thereafter how he soes peace with his brothers.
First time we met David,
we were in chains.
I'd seen a lot of things during my time as a guard,
but nothing like the peace that you all had.
Prison chains may be strong,
but we all had something much stronger.
But we had to work for that peace.
Right, Phil?
That's right.
See, there was a misunderstanding,
that God blown all out of proportion,
and I didn't handle it the best.
The more I tried to defend myself,
the worse it became.
Brothers, there must be some mistake.
This isn't true, you know me.
I wasn't prepared for how far I would go.
There's one more announcement.
Brother Philip Kim is no longer serving as an elder.
The next few months were a real struggle.
But by more details came to light,
I thought I'd be reappointed,
but I wasn't.
I couldn't understand why.
Phil, come on.
I felt bitterness growing inside.
Everything became about me,
how I felt, what I deserved.
It was like a fog that stopped me
from seeing what Jehovah deserved,
and I really needed his help.
I found comfort in accounts of Jehovah's servants
who were either misunderstood or misjudged,
but maintained their loyalty to him.
They helped me realize that it's a privilege
just to be in Jehovah's organization.
Being a peace with my brothers was more important
than any appointed position.
Without peace,
I don't know how we could have managed what was to come.
Our threat is fat today,
and I'll be your secretary,
just like Barrick was the Jeremiah.
I don't know what I'd do without you.
The question now for all of us is,
how can we imitate the example of Mathibosheth?
First of all,
if you are the victim of minor gossip
or rude treatment by someone,
why not choose to let it pass
and not make a big issue of it?
Isn't that what first Peter 4.8 advises?
First Peter 4.8 reads,
above all things have intense love for one another,
and then it tells us what our love can do.
It says,
because love covers a multitude of sins.
Yes, love covers sins and imperfections,
if we are willing to let love have its way.
But what if you are the victim
of a more serious injustice?
For example, the brother in the video,
he felt that he was a victim of injustice
when he was deleted as an elder.
He tried to clarify matters,
but since he didn't get the response he was hoping for,
he became very upset.
He lost his peace,
and he caused others to lose their peaceful relationship with him.
To regain his peace,
the brother dug into the scriptures,
looking for examples he could benefit from,
and he prayerfully looked to Jehovah to help him.
He could see the importance of self-control
and being guided by God's spirit.
As a result,
he was able to be at peace with himself,
and so peace with his brothers.
Now think for a moment about the unfair decision David made,
when he told Mothibusheth that he and Zyba were to share the land.
Zyba was the cause of the problem,
not Mothibusheth,
however, Mothibusheth displayed the qualities of a spiritual man
by not looking out for his own interests,
by being patient,
and by not seeking vengeance.
Read with me at 2 Samuel chapter 19,
verse 25 through verse 28.
2 Samuel 19, 25 through 28.
It reads,
When he came to Jerusalem,
that is, Mothibusheth went to Jerusalem to meet the king.
The king said to him,
Why did you not go with me Mothibusheth?
To this he said,
My Lord, the king,
my servant tricked me.
For your servant had said,
Let me get my donkey saddled,
so that I may ride on it and go with the king.
For your servant is crippled,
but he slandered your servant to my Lord, the king.
However, my Lord, the king,
is like an angel of the true God.
So do whatever seems good to you.
All the household of my father could have been doomed to death by my Lord, the king,
and yet you placed your servant among those eating at your table.
So what right do I have to cry out further to the king?
It's truly remarkable.
Mothibusheth was grateful for what he had,
and he was seeking nothing more.
He enjoyed peace of mind and heart.
If a matter involving slander or fraud arises today,
a Christian may choose to follow Jesus' instructions at Matthew 18, 15, through 17.
However, if for some reason following that procedure does not fully resolve the matter,
he or she may choose to pursue it no further,
and suffer loss rather than disturb the peace of the congregation.
We can leave any unresolved issues with Jehovah,
knowing that he sees what we do and what others do,
and he will carry out justice at the right time.
For our own benefit, we really must try to let go of resentment.
When we do, we benefit ourselves.
When we forgive, we forgive others, Jehovah forgives us.
Now that doesn't mean that we minimize or excuse the wrong conduct of fellow believers, no.
But it does mean that we imitate Mothibusheth by letting go of resentment and pursuing peace.
We draw closer to Jehovah by following the advice at Psalm 55-22.
Throw your burden on Jehovah, and he will sustain you.
And never will he allow the righteous one to fall.
And as Romans 15-13 assures us,
Jehovah will fill you with all joy and peace by your trusting in Him.
But the Joel Dalinger, a helper to the service committee,
will now consider the next talk of this symposium.
How they sowed and reaped peace, Paul and Barnabas.
What's the next challenge we'll discuss?
It's a disagreement between elders.
If you're an elder, have you experienced that?
Were voices raised? Did tempers flare?
Has a friendship with a fellow elder cooled off?
Though we rightly expect appointed brothers to be exemplary,
the fact is, all of us, including elders, are still imperfect.
Differences in backgrounds, personalities, experience, and opinions,
can lead to disagreements.
And a disagreement, if not resolved, can disrupt our peace and that of others.
In this talk, we'll consider how two elders in the first century,
Paul and Barnabas sowed and reaped peace.
Let's see how their example can help appointed men today,
including all of you dear elders, to resolve a disagreement.
Please open your Bible with me to Acts 15 and read together verses 36 to 39.
In the reading, please note the problem that arose between Paul and Barnabas.
That's Acts 15 beginning at verse 36.
After some days, Paul said to Barnabas,
let us now return and visit the brothers in every one of the cities
where we proclaim the word of Jehovah to see how they are.
Barnabas was determined to take along John, who was called Mark.
Paul, however, was not in favor of taking him along with them,
seeing that he had departed from them in Pamphilia,
and had not gone with them to the work.
At this, there was a sharp burst of anger,
so that they separated from each other,
and Barnabas took Mark along and sailed away to Cyprus.
What was the problem?
These two elders strongly disagreed about whether to take Mark with them
on their next missionary tour.
Of course, expressing a difference of opinion is not always wrong,
verse 7 of this same chapter reports that the apostles
and older men in Jerusalem had an intense discussion
that led to a good outcome.
But in this case, what resulted?
Please look again at verse 39.
It would be nice to read,
at this, Paul and Barnabas prayed to Jehovah and came to an agreement.
Sadly, though, their discussion on this occasion
led to a sharp burst of anger and they separated.
As a result, their friendship was affected by a temporary strain.
Why do we say temporary?
Because in time, it appears that Paul and Barnabas put this matter behind them.
A short time later, in Paul's letter to the Galatians,
he wrote about Barnabas and the activity they had enjoyed together
and Paul did not bring up their dispute.
Also, when Paul later wrote to the Galatians and then to Timothy,
Paul spoke well of Mark.
In fact, in Paul's last inspired letter,
the second to Timothy, he wrote this,
bring Mark along with you, for he is helpful to me in the ministry.
Yes, it seems that Paul and Barnabas resolved their disagreement.
Now, let's think about that, brothers.
What made that possible?
It's this.
Long before their disagreement,
they had shared together in an exciting ministry.
For years, they were united in what the Bible calls a bond of peace.
So, even though their friendship experienced strain,
the bond between them was strong, strong enough to withstand the stress.
Well, let's bring this to our day.
In the following dramatization, please notice how an elder shows peace.
But you know there's more to the story?
Phil didn't know just how tense things were between Tim and I.
No idea.
We never talked.
I mean, really talked about it until it was too late.
Look, we need to talk.
I think we need to seriously reconsider Phil's qualifications.
You know he's not the type of brother that...
Enough. Enough about Phil.
I know he's your friend.
Friend.
But the body agreed that...
Friend?
He's worked with us for years.
The body decided unanimously that he should no longer serve.
You pushed them.
Excuse me?
It's enough that we have those outside the congregation
putting pressure on us.
We do not need more in here.
The conversation.
The argument.
It was terrible.
We both said things we didn't mean.
And after that, we both handled the situation poorly.
We needed to make things right.
It wasn't easy.
But we talked it out.
And we made peace.
With Jehovah's help.
Can you imagine what it would have been like in that cell block?
If we hadn't.
We finally told Phil the whole story.
Once we were all roommates.
Wow.
Let's go sing.
Our soul may cease.
God's people are living in peace.
With our eyes of faith.
We see beyond the clouds.
And know that the storm soon will see.
Elders, here's the question before all of us now.
How can we imitate Paul and Barnabas?
First.
As elders, we must apply scriptural counsel
and our dealings with one another.
In the video, we just saw how imperfection
got the better of Tim and Carl.
Their body language, choice of words, tone of voice.
As Tim put it, the argument was terrible.
But after the dispute.
What did those two elders eventually do right?
They applied scriptural counsel and made peace.
For example, the divine counsel at James 3 and verse 17
reminds all of us to be peaceable and reasonable.
The watchtower once suggested how this could be applied to elders.
I quote.
Peace makers modestly express their thoughts.
And then respectfully listen to those of others.
Instead of insisting on his own way,
a peacemaker will prayerfully consider his brother's viewpoint.
If no Bible principle is violated,
there is usually room for varied points of view.
Experienced overseers know that preserving the peace
is more important than getting one's own way.
What a beautiful thought.
So what's our first lesson?
If we as elders apply scriptural counsel
in our dealings with one another,
we'll never allow a difference of opinion
to become a cause for animosity.
Romans 12 and verse 10 outlines a second lesson.
Please open your Bible with me there.
Under inspiration at Romans 12 and verse 10, Paul wrote this.
In brotherly love, have tender affection for one another.
In showing honor to one another, take the lead.
Brothers, elders, now before life gets even more difficult,
this is what we need to do.
We need to strengthen love and affection for one another.
We can do that by continuing to speak well of our fellow elders
in public and in private,
by resisting the urge to talk negatively to other elders
about any disagreements that arise,
and by regularly reflecting on our brothers good qualities
and on our past service together.
In the video, weren't we happy to see how Tim and Carl
imitated Paul and Barnabas and eventually reaped peace?
Though not easy, they applied scriptural counsel
and resolved their problem.
That warm smile on Carl's face, when he showed up at Tim's home,
the dessert, perhaps Tim's favorite pie,
the heart to heart talk, and their lasting friendship,
even in prison,
shows that they maintained their love and affection for each other.
Dear brothers, elders, may we do likewise.
Let's settle disagreements quickly and peacefully.
When we do so, we'll reap not only peace,
but we'll prove to be examples to the flock,
just like Paul and Barnabas.
Brother Stephen let a member of the governing body
will now consider the final talk of this symposium
how they sowed and reaped peace.
Modern day examples.
How do many people react when they see corruption and injustice?
They become incensed, and they want to fix the problem.
How do they try to fix the problem?
By becoming involved in political efforts or social movements
that claim to fight corruption and injustice?
In contrast, why did Jehovah's Witnesses
not get involved in political efforts or social movements?
The simple answer, because they've learned from God's word
that the problems of this world cannot be corrected.
Ecclesiastes 115 says,
what is crooked cannot be made straight.
Sayings world around us is like the truck of a tree
that has grown so crooked, twisted,
nor old it cannot be made straight.
Jehovah's Witnesses have learned it would be futile
to spend our time in energy trying to correct
what Jehovah tells us cannot be corrected.
Additionally, Jehovah's Witnesses have learned
how and where real peace can be found even now.
In this regard, let's consider two modern day examples
of ones who came to acquire Jehovah's thinking on this matter.
Let's talk about as Hideo Nahokbria and Fratha Brun,
now first as Hideo.
Born in a remote part of East Timor,
he experienced horrible guerrilla warfare during his childhood.
Many of his neighbors disappeared or were killed,
and he feared he would be next.
But some years later he moved to the capital city
and entered a university where he met many other use
with background similar to his.
He became part of a student group that was trying
to achieve social change through political action.
Many political demonstrations were organized,
but most ended up in riots with many of his friends injured.
Some were even killed.
But then, through a relative who was studying
with Jehovah's Witnesses, as Hideo started to study.
Now here's what he said as he started this study.
As I studied the Bible, I began to feel that I had never
really known love.
Despite my rough appearance and disposition,
the Witnesses treated me with fellow feeling
and brotherly affection.
Well, soon he was baptized, became a regular pioneer,
and he was so happy because now he knew
he was truly helping people.
He ended his life story with these words.
In the past I felt angry, unloved, and unlovable.
But thanks to Jehovah at last, I have found true love and peace.
But now let's talk about Fratha.
From an early age he was very upset
by all the hatred, bloodshed, and war he saw around him.
But especially he was disturbed by religion's role in all of this.
He observed that much of this hatred, bloodshed, and war
was encouraged, supported, or at least condoned by religion.
But in 1955 he attended a Convention of Jehovah's Witnesses.
And after the Convention he accepted a Bible study.
Now during his studies he learned many wonderful things,
but something he learned really motivated him.
He learned the identity of the great prostitute,
Bab and the Great, mentioned in Revelation 17 and 18.
He learned that this prostitute is the world-empower-a-false religion.
Then he was really amazed when he was shown Revelation 1824,
which says in her the prostitute was found the blood
of all those who have been slaughtered on the earth.
So he learned that the world's religions could never be a force
for international peace, because they take sides.
They're divided, and they go to war.
In contrast he saw that Jehovah's Witnesses
are an international brotherhood that truly practices what Jesus taught.
Freythe's progress was very fast.
He got baptized, started pioneering, he attended the 50th class of Gilead.
And as served many years in Guatemala helping people as he was helped
to find the true source of peace.
But now we ask, what are lessons we can learn from S. Hedio and Freythe,
or many, but here are three big ones.
Number one, we can never correct the corruption and injustice of this world
by means of political efforts or social movements.
That reminds me of the illustration of other years
about trying to get rid of a problem with spider webs
but being unable to get rid of the spider.
You're not the webs down.
Spider builds them right back, knock them down, builds them back.
You never get rid of the problem.
Well, in this illustration, Satan is the spider.
And since he's the source of corruption and injustice,
as long as he exists, the problem will exist.
And little puny humans can't get rid of Satan.
He's superhuman.
So the solution must also be superhuman.
And that's where God's kingdom comes in.
God's kingdom can and will not only get rid of the webs,
but the old spider Satan himself too.
Now here's our second lesson.
We must remember that political activism often leads to violence,
which is the opposite of peace.
We pursue peace, don't we?
Not conduct that often leads to violence.
Our third lesson, unlike the religions of this world,
we must promote peace with all people,
which definitely means we refuse to get involved in any way
in the wars of Satan's world.
That reminds me of an experience a young brother had in the ministry.
A very emotional woman said to him,
My son died.
For you to have the freedom you have.
Why won't you fight for your country?
Well, very calmly, the young brother said,
I'm very sorry about the loss of your dear son.
But one thing I can guarantee you is that it was not one of Jehovah's Witnesses
who killed your son.
Now, I don't know if you can make that guarantee about your religion,
but I can make that guarantee.
Well, as it turned out, she was Catholic,
so she definitely was unable to make that guarantee.
So let's remember these three powerful lessons that we have discussed.
But now we'd like to say to you dear interested ones in attendance,
if you're not yet one of Jehovah's Witnesses,
we warmly invite you to please study the Bible with us.
See for yourself how genuine love is the best way of life
and is the best way to deal with the problems that divide society today.
Jesus made it crystal clear that the identified mark of true Christians is love.
At John 1335, he said,
by this all will know that you are my disciples if you have love among yourselves.
So dear interested ones,
say for yourself whether this genuine love exists among Jehovah's Witnesses.
But now we say to those of you who are already Jehovah's Witnesses,
please continue to cultivate and show love for the whole association of brothers.
And doing so will require that you remain strictly neutral
regarding the world's political affairs and other controversies.
Just as our leader remained neutral.
At John 1714, Jesus said of His disciples,
they are no part of the world,
just as I am no part of the world.
So during discussions in the ministry or anywhere for that matter,
remain strictly neutral on political topics.
Take no position regarding what laws should be enacted,
repealed, or changed,
and don't pressure others to agree with your view.
But to succeed in this,
we must be careful not to allow the media of this world to manipulate our thinking.
News broadcasts are often presented in a biased, opinionated way.
So we've got to be careful not to adopt the bias of a commentator.
Only if we keep our thinking neutral,
will we be able to keep our speech and actions neutral also?
And remember,
your good example of showing love in Christian neutrality
may attract honest hearted ones to the truth.
But now we ask,
what have we learned from this symposium?
We'll let's highlight just one valuable takeaway lesson
from each of our six parts.
The first part, Joseph and his brothers,
our lesson,
so peace by letting go of resentment.
The second part, the Gibbianites,
humbly submit to Jehovah's will,
even if it differs from what you prefer.
The third part, Gideon.
Prevent conflicts from escalating
by choosing words that calm, reassure, and heal.
The fourth part, Abigail.
Do what you can to promote peace,
and then leave matters with Jehovah.
The fifth part, Muthibosheth,
be willing to suffer loss
rather than disturb the peace and the congregation.
And just another thought in this,
let's always remember that defending Jehovah's name and reputation
is far more important than trying to defend her own name and reputation.
Be willing to suffer loss
rather than disturb the peace in the congregation.
The sixth part, this part, modern day examples,
serve the God of peace with His people,
and you will have peace.
Yes, during this symposium,
we've learned many valuable lessons
as to how we can sow peace.
Let's all be determined to do so with all our heart.
And what will be the final result?
For the answer,
let's watch the final dramatization
of this symposium.
There's one more story to tell.
I didn't know it at the time,
but seeds of truth were being planted in my heart.
You were also different.
I couldn't understand it.
You were prisoners.
Yes.
But you felt free,
truly free.
After you were released,
it became clear to me
that you have God's blessing.
And I wanted to know why.
Phil, help me find the answer.
And you will know the truth.
And the truth will set you free.
Phil encouraged me to make the truth my own.
I had real trouble at first.
With all the turmoil going on at the time,
the idea of being peaceable
and waiting on God's kingdom,
it was hard to grasp.
But with Jehovah's help,
and the patience of these good people,
I was baptized before the start of the Great Tribulation.
Joseph, during our time in prison,
the story of your life,
your time in prison,
and how Jehovah was always with you,
became a real source of strength for us.
I remember one day,
Carl said,
what did you say?
I said, one day,
we'll have a meal with Joseph.
And we'll say,
thank you.
And here we are.
Really, it's I who should thank you.
Each and every one of your stories
touches my heart.
You know a lot about my life.
But would it be alright
if I shared a few more stories?
Please, we have so many questions.
Can you tell us about Egypt?
We're all really like dreams.
We got to talk about those dreams.
You do have many questions.
And I have many details to share.
And thanks to our God, Jehovah,
we have all the time we need.
Have we discussed during this symposium?
It's expressed at Galatians chapter 6, verse 7.
For whatever a person is sewing,
this he will also reap.
If we sow tomato seed,
we will always get tomato plants.
Well, this unfailing fundamental truth applies to peace.
If we sow peace,
we will always reap peace.
Although in some cases,
it may take some time for the peace we sowed
to bring good results.
But if we persevere in sewing peace,
we will reap peace of mind,
peace with others,
and most importantly peace with Jehovah,
and we'll reap the reward
of living forever in a world
where there will be an abundance of peace.
So let's be determined
to sow peace now
and we can reap peace forever.
And if you think about it,
that's a pretty good investment of our time
and effort, isn't it?
So peace now
and reap peace forever.
Thank you, brothers, for those practical talks.
May we all remember these useful examples
and sow peace now
so that we can reap peace eternally.
Let's sing together song number 28.
Gaining Jehovah's Friendship.
That's song number 28.